Information security (infosec) is the practice of protecting information by mitigating information risks. It is part of information risk management. It typically involves preventing or reducing the probability of unauthorized or inappropriate access to data or the unlawful use, disclosure, disruption, deletion, corruption, modification, inspection, recording, or devaluation of information. It also involves actions intended to reduce the adverse impacts of such incidents. Protected information may take any form, e.g., electronic or physical, tangible (e.g., paperwork), or intangible (e.g., knowledge). Information security's primary focus is the balanced protection of data confidentiality, integrity, and availability (known as the CIA triad, unrelated to the US government organization) while maintaining a focus on efficient policy implementation but without hampering organization productivity. This is largely achieved through a structured risk management process.

To standardize this discipline, academics and professionals collaborate to offer guidance, policies, and industry standards on passwords, antivirus software, firewalls, encryption software, legal liability, security awareness and training, and so forth. This standardization may be further driven by a wide variety of laws and regulations that affect how data is accessed, processed, stored, transferred, and destroyed.

While paper-based business operations are still prevalent, requiring their own set of information security practices, enterprise digital initiatives are increasingly being emphasized, with information assurance dealt with by information technology (IT) security specialists. These specialists apply information security to technology (most often some form of computer system).

# Security Goals

The "CIA triad" of confidentiality, integrity, and availability is at the heart of information security. The concept was introduced in the Anderson Report in 1972 and later repeated in The Protection of Information in Computer Systems. The abbreviation was coined by Steve Lipner around 1986.

In information security, confidentiality "is the property, that information is not made available or disclosed to unauthorized individuals, entities, or processes." While similar to "privacy", the two words are not interchangeable. Rather, confidentiality is a component of privacy that is implemented to protect data from unauthorized viewers. Examples of confidentiality of electronic data being compromised include laptop theft, password theft, or sensitive emails being sent to the incorrect individuals.

In IT security, data integrity means maintaining and assuring the accuracy and completeness of data. This means that data cannot be modified in an unauthorized or undetected manner. More broadly, integrity is an information security principle that involves human/social, process, and commercial integrity, as well as data integrity. As such it touches on aspects such as credibility, consistency, truthfulness, completeness, accuracy, timeliness, and assurance.

For any information system to serve its purpose, the information must be available when it is needed. This means the computing systems used to store and process the information, the security controls used to protect it, and the communication channels used to access it must be functioning correctly. Ensuring availability may also involve preventing denial-of-service attacks, such as a flood of incoming messages to the target system, essentially forcing it to shut down.

In addition to the classic CIA triad of security goals, some organisations may want to include security goals such as authenticity, accountability, non-repudiation, and reliability. The merits of the Parkerian Hexad are a subject of debate amongst security professionals.
